





Olympus D-150 Camera




## Olympus D-150 Camera


### Introduction


In March 2002, I spotted a good deal on an Olympus D-150 digital camera
at my local Costco. At ~$150 it was too good to pass up, with 1.3
Mpixel resolution and 3x Optical zoom - lower resolution than what was
commonly available, but compact and cheap. After doing a cursory glance
at the major digital photography sites (my favorite is [here](http://www.dpreview.com)) and not turning up anything
seriously negative, I bought one. Once I got it home and cut it out of
the plastic package, I asked the obvious question: Is it compatible
with Linux? To my disappointment, the answer was "Almost".
The reason for this is detailed [here](http://www.mail-archive.com/aps%40ooops.de/msg00007.html):
apparently, the good folks at Olympus screwed up and got the bulk data
signature wrong - it should have been "USBS", but the D-150 sends
"USBU". Windows doesn't check the signature and doesn't care. Linux is
more careful and rejects the apparently malformed data. 


The authors of the Linux USB Storage driver have chosen not to
support the malformed Olympus data, but they are good enough to suggest
how we might alter their driver to handle the error. Unfortunately, the
recommended fix also breaks the driver for other compliant devices. Of
course there's no need for this - we can support both the broken D-150
as well as the rest of the world with only a slight impairment of our
ability to detect errors in the USB interface. 


My patch for the USB Storage driver declares an additional bulk data
signature and checks for both this one and the regular one. Either one
will satisfy the driver - anything else is considered erroneous and
results in the data being rejected. The patch is against the 2.4.18
kernel, but it's simple and should be easily backported to any other
2.4.x kernel. 


### Great News (2003-06-09)


Several Linux Distros are including this patch (or one like it):   


* Lycoris has applied my patch to their standard kernel (They even
thanked me!).


* RedHat has patched their kernel with a similar fix to the one
included here. I'm running kernel-2.4.20-18.9 and the Olympus support
is included!



### More Great News (2003-11-23)


Starting with kernel 2.4.22 this patch is no longer necessary. The stock
USB storage driver has been updated to recognise Olympus cameras.
### Compiling and Using


To begin, grab the patch for your kernel from below.
uncompress the patch: gzip d150-patch.2.4.xx.gz  

cd to /drivers/usb/storage  

apply the patch: patch -p0 < (path to the patch)/d150-patch.2.4.xx  

recompile your kernel modules & install them. If you don't know how
to do this, google around for instructions - I can't really help too
much with your unique system configuration. 


Once you've got the updated usb-storage driver installed, plugging
in your D-150 camera should load the driver module and hook it to the
scsi subsystem. Check the /proc/scsi/scsi file for details - you should
see the camera listed in there. If you see it, mount it someplace
convenient and start copying to/from it. Remember to unmount it before
you unplug the USB cable and everything should be just fine. 


### Automatic Mounting


There are a lot of ways to automatically mount a usb-storage device.
Here are a few that I've tried:  

  

#### Hotplug


On my RedHat 7.3 system, I have in the past set up the HotPlug system
to automatically mount the camera when it is connected to the USB port,
but for some unknown reason this has ceased to work (I suspect it's due
to the fact that the script is called 'usb-storage' which is
specifically a no-no). You can try it though by following these steps:  

  

First create the directory /mnt/camera, then add the following line to
your /etc/fstab file:
/dev/sda1 /mnt/camera vfat noauto,owner
0 0 


Finally, create the file /etc/hotplug/usb/usb-storage with the
following: 


#!/bin/csh  

# hotplug script to mount the usb-storage device  

# on /mnt/camera  

mount /mnt/camera 


Use 'chmod' to make this file executable ('chmod +x usb-storage').
After rebooting, anytime you connect the camera to the computer it will
automatically be mounted. You will still need to unmount the camera
manually before disconnecting it. 


If you're running 'magicdev' as on my RH7.3/Gnome system, an icon
for the camera will appear on your desktop when the HotPlug system
mounts it. You can then unmount it from the GUI when necessary without
becoming root. Yay magicdev!  




#### Autofs


This seems to work, but has the disadvantage that you must know that
you've connected the camera. Basically the Linux autofs system will
automatically mount a filesystem when you try to access it and the
device containing the filesystem is available. To configure this, first
edit the /etc/auto.master file and uncomment the line referring to the
misc system:  

  

/misc    /etc/auto.misc    --timeout=60  

  

Then, add the following line the the /etc/auto.misc file:  

  

usb        -fstype=auto   
    :/dev/sda1  

  

Then, start the autofs system:  

  

/etc/init.d/autofs start  

  

Now whenever you access the directory /misc/usb, if the camera is
plugged in it will be mounted there.  

  

You still have to unmount the camera by hand before unplugging it
though.  

#### Nautilus


You can get the Nautilus desktop to mount the usb-storage device for
you as well. First, add the following line to /etc/fstab:  

  

/dev/sda1              
/mnt/usb               
auto    rw,noauto,user  0 0  

  

then add the directory /mnt/usb  

  

mkdir /mnt/usb.  

  

Now,  log out and log back into your user session. Right-click on
the desktop and select the Disks->usb item. This should mount the
camera on your desktop. You can unmount it by right-clicking on the
icon and selecting Unmount.  

#### Automount Improvements


All of these techniques are hampered by the fact that you have to
hard-code the device (/dev/sda1) into the configuration. If you have
more than one usb-storage device, this breaks down since they are
allocated different names as they are discovered (sda1, sdb1, etc).
Ideally, there would be a usb-storage hotplug script that could
determine the proper device and mount it. So far I haven't figured out
how to make that work.  

### Future Improvements


With the present patch, signatures of either 'USBU' or 'USBS' are
sufficient to declare a bulk data transfer as good. A more robust error
detection scheme would key off the vendor/device id so that only the
correct signature would be selected according to the device which sent
the data.
Since the ambiguity in the present patch is just one bit out of
thousands in a bulk data transfer, this probably isn't a big enough
improvement to make it worthwhile. I don't believe that the USB
protocol applies any Forward Error Correction or detection such as CRCs
or checksums, so the only errors that could be detected by the Bulk
Data Signature are errors within the signature itself. 


### Supported Models


The following cameras are known to work with this patch:  

Olympus D-150 Zoom  

Olympus C-220 Zoom  

Olympus D-520 Zoom
 If you know of any others, please let me know. 


### Download


  

For 2.4.18 kernels: <d150-patch.2.4.18.gz>.  

For 2.4.19 kernels: <d150-patch.2.4.19.gz>.  

For 2.4.20 kernels: <d150-patch.2.4.20.gz>.  

For 2.4.21 kernels: <d150-patch.2.4.21.gz>.  

For 2.4.22 kernels: No patch necessary!
Please let me know if this is useful for you. 


[Return to Linux page.](linux.html)


##### **Last Updated**


:2003-11-23
##### **Comments to:**


[Eric Brombaugh](mailto:ebrombaugh1@cox.net)  

   



